title: Contact
header: Contacting Evan
description: If you want to email me.
menu-position: 90


---

The best way to reach me is by email (not facebook).
My address is:

> $\text{evan}@\text{evanchen}\cdot\text{cc}$.

Although I do my best to respond to as much as I can,
I admit that I am not able to respond to everything.
(Also, my replies are often terse.
Please don't be offended if so; I am just trying to be efficient.)

In some cases your question may already be answered on the site:
e.g. [tutoring](otis.html),
[contest resource recommendations](recommend.html)
or the [FAQ](faqs.html).
If you need help with an olympiad problem,
you are better off asking on a forum like [AOPS](artofproblemsolving.com).
Contrary to popular belief I can't sight-solve everything!

Here are some hints:

* Comments, thanks, or suggestions on my writing are always appreciated!
  This includes any typos you find, no matter how trivial.

* Specific queries get faster and better responses.
  So "can you explain this line of your solution to USAMO 20XY/Z?"
  will usually be answered pretty swiftly.
  Conversely, "how do i geo" will get at best a link to the FAQ.

* Proper syntax, English, capitalization, etc is appreciated.
  (I know some of you are not native English speakers,
  so I try to overlook this when I can.)

* Please be patient. "Bumping" a message before
  I have found time to respond is likely to annoy me.
  I will not respond to a non-urgent message
  that is bumped after less than one day.

* *Don't be too shy*! I might sound scary here,
  but if you have a good reason for contacting me
  and do so politely, then I won't mind.
  I am happy to help where I can. <br>
  (Examples of good requests: specific math query,
  something I wrote is unclear, found a typo,
  follow-up questions, permission requests,
  questions on my past experiences, etc.  I'm sure there's more.)

* In particular, there's no need to send an email
  asking if you can ask a question.

## Special instructions for advice

If you are asking a question along the lines of "how do I improve at math contests",
it is helpful to include as much specific information as possible.
This usually means mentioning examples of problems you could not solve.
(To draw an analogy, when people ask for advice in StarCraft,
they are usually required to link a few recent replays,
so the advice-giver can watch how they play and point out mistakes.)
It's also helpful to talk about what you have already tried.

If you are able to, please pick 3-20 examples of recent problems that you tried
but could not solve.
For each problem, reproduce the statement,
and then describe your thought process and what you tried.
This helps me understand how you think and where you are at.

[This is an example of a well-thought question](https://aops.com/community/p15430373).
It focuses on a specific topic, describes what the asker's mindset is,
names specific examples of problems and how the asker tried the problem,
and mentions what resources the asker has already tried.
Because of this, the replies are informative and targeted.
