title: Famous open problems
header: For claimed solutions to famous problems
description: People claiming to solve an open problem

---

This page is meant to be a canned response to emails I receive from
people who claim to have found a proof to a famous
problem such as P = NP, the Collatz Conjecture, the Twin Prime Conjecture,
Goldbach's Conjecture, Fermat's Last Theorem, trisecting the angle, etc.

I don't list this page on the website's navigation sidebar
because I don't want to receive more such emails.
But you can find it in the source repository of this website,
or if you know the URL to this page.

# You are wrong

The first thing I need to honestly tell you is that **you are wrong**.
I'm not going to be polite about this and say "you are probably wrong".
Don't kid yourself.

**If you can't accept this truth,
then (1) stop reading here, and (2) don't expect help from me.**

## What makes an attempt wrong?

From now on, I'm going to assume you know that your claimed solution is wrong,
but you don't know _why_ it's wrong.

Roughly, the various wrong solutions generated by amateurs come in two flavors.

- One is that their "proof" is a coherent sequence of logical steps,
  but one of the steps is wrong.
  In this case, a very generous mathematician might be able to help you,
  because they can point out the step that is wrong.

  Tragically, in math, if your proof is a sequence of 100 steps and one is wrong,
  then you do not have a 99% correct proof; you have a 0% correct proof.
  In all these cases, there's usually no way to repair the attempt.
  I think a common reflex from realizing that one step is wrong
  is that, "oh, but it's only one step and I can fix it".
  Take my word for it: _you won't be able to fix it_.

- The other variety is "this isn't a proof".
  I don't really know how to help people in this variety.
  To do mathematics, you need to be able to understand what a definition means
  and what a proof is --- the rules of the game, so to speak.
  Otherwise, it's like trying to help someone win a chess game when they don't
  even understand how to tell the difference between a rook and a pawn.

  I once wrote an article called
  [Intro to Proofs for the Morbidly Curious](/handouts/NaturalProof/NaturalProof.pdf),
  but this is not easy reading, and it's unclear to me whether this would be
  helpful to the kind of people that are reading this page.
  A better reference might be an introduction book like
  [Journey into Mathematics: An Introduction to Proofs][rotman].

- For the Greek construction problems like trisecting the angle,
  there is an extra category called "doesn't understand the problem statement".
  More on that later.

[rotman]: https://store.doverpublications.com/0486453065.html

## Links

Here are some links that may be useful to you:

- [This academia.SE post](https://academia.stackexchange.com/a/18570/186172) by Kaveh
- [Advice for amateurs on math writing](https://cohn.mit.edu/advice/)

# Extra note for Greek constructions

In mathematics, one can actually come up with _proofs of impossibility_.
This is a concept that doesn't exist in many other fields of study.

Here's one example:

> It's impossible to find three odd integers with sum 1000000.

When I say this, it's not because we tried really hard to find such integers
and eventually gave up and decreed the task as impossible.
It's because we have a proof: the sum three odd numbers is odd,
and therefore it can never equal 1000000.

The impossibility of trisecting the angle is obviously more complicated,
but it's an impossibility _proof_ nonetheless.
The article [Trisecting the Angle][trisect] is a nice explanation,
and is worth reading for anyone interested in math
(not just people who have claimed to trisect the angle!).

[trisect]: https://www.cs.princeton.edu/~chazelle/courses/BIB/trisect.html

# Career advice after accepting defeat

Despite my best intentions to help,
I think a lot of people who make it this far on the page
will still be convinced they have a brilliant solution
to a famously unsolved problem that nobody is willing to acknowledge.
Again, for these people, there is nothing I can do: they won't change their mind.

My hope is that this section will be beneficial to the small 1%-2%
of people out there who have enough touch with reality
to finally acknowledge that their attempted proof is non-working,
and are wondering what to do next.
(I do think that there's something admirable about being curious about math
even with no formal training, being willing to make an earnest attempt at an
interesting-looking problem, and finally having the humility to accept defeat.
All of these are good traits for any scientist to have.)

But anyway, here's the career advice I promised you:

1. If you don't understand what a proof is, learn that first.
   That is more important than anything else.

2. Prioritize learning new math over trying to solve open problems.
   There is _so much_ math after Calculus III;
   see the [Napkin](napkin.html), for example.
   This is the same reason why I anti-recommend most
   [high school math research](https://web.evanchen.cc/faq-school.html#S-5).

3. If you really must work on open problems, avoid the famous ones.
   (See [Terence Tao's thoughts on that][tao-famous].)

[tao-famous]: https://terrytao.wordpress.com/career-advice/dont-prematurely-obsess-on-a-single-big-problem-or-big-theory/
