title: Unix FAQ's
header: Unix FAQ's
description: Some FAQ's about Linux and the like.

---

[Return to FAQ Index.](faqs.html)

These are FAQ's about software I use.
You might also see [LaTeX FAQ's](faq-latex.html).

### {{ faq("U-1", "If I don't know anything, where do I start?") }}

Check the [plz learn code](techsupport.html) page.

### {{ faq("U-2", "What programming language should I learn first?") }}

I recommend [Python](http://openbookproject.net/thinkcs/python/english3e/index.html)
but plenty of other languages are OK too.
Prospective competitive programmers (IOI, etc.) should learn C++.

I personally anti-recommend PHP and JavaScript because I think weakly typed
languages are not good for learning.
(I have no stance on duck typing vs static typing though.)
HTML and CSS are *not* programming languages, they are markup languages.

### {{ faq("U-3a", "Why do you use Linux?") }}

If I had to summarize this in one word, it would be "control".

I insist my computers are fully transparent and configurable.
I want to be able to see every dial and knob and turn them as I please.
In exchange, this means investing time to learn how my computer works,
doing my own homework (aka search engine) whenever issues arise,
and writing my own tools when no existing software fits my needs.
This process is time-consuming but
[I enjoy it](https://xkcd.com/974/) so I am happy with this cost.

Also [Linux package management is
amazing](https://itsfoss.com/package-manager/).
If one day I hear about a program called Geogebra,
I can install it by typing `sudo pacman -S geogebra` into my command line
(here `pacman` is the Arch Linux package manager).
That's *it*. You do not even need to open a web browser.

### {{ faq("U-3b", "Should I try Linux?") }}

- If you're not willing to use search engines to do your own homework
	when you don't know something, then no.
- If you're just learning how to code, then maybe.
	Some people think it's too overwhelming to learn both at the same time,
	others think that Windows is so bad for programming that
	it's actually easier to switch to a beginner-friendly Linux
	and deal with both at the same time. Up to you.
- If you want to do serious programming (say, building a nontrivial website,
	or doing intensive calculations that require special libraries),
	you should consider switching more strongly. The truth is that the
	[majority of programmers use Linux](https://www.reddit.com/r/linux/comments/vytkf),
	and hence languages, development tools, libraries and so on
	tend to be Linux-targeted.
	The situation for Windows and OSX has gotten better over time,
	but practically speaking I don't think setting up a development environment
	is ever going to be easier on a commercial OS than on Linux.
- If you're curious, then yes, try it out. It's free.
	If you don't like it after trying it, switch back.
	Just be aware there's a bit of learning curve depending on which
	distribution you pick up.

### {{ faq("U-4a", "Why do you use Arch Linux?") }}

I've only used Ubuntu and Arch Linux.
I switched from Ubuntu to Arch Linux because Arch

- was faster;
- was more lightweight (basically nothing installed by default);
- was more transparent;
- has significantly more up-to-date package repositories;
- has a [do-it-yourself philosophy](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Arch_Linux#Principles).

To me Ubuntu is sort of the midpoint of Windows and Arch Linux.
It's a *bona fide* Linux system, but there is a lot of pre-installed parts
and a lot of things that are hidden behind graphical interfaces.

### {{ faq("U-4b", "Should I switch to Arch Linux?") }}

Only if you really like doing homework ;)

Note well: if you are new to Linux, installing Arch will be a trial by fire.
This is not necessarily a bad thing; it might actually be better this way if
your goal it learn about systems, because by the end of the process, you will
know way more than you started with. Just be aware of it and probably block out
a week or two.

### {{ faq("U-4c", "Which Linux distribution should I use?") }}

I've only tried two distributions so I have no comment here, sorry.
Search the web.

### {{ faq("U-5", "Why are you so obsessed with the terminal?") }}

I think the analogy in my head is like, when you use a terminal, you are kind of
"talking to the computer directly", rather than going through some user interface.
It's sort of like, once you know LaTeX, you wouldn't want to go back to the
mouse-based equation editor, because it's faster to just type `\frac12x^2+3`
than to click on the fraction button, then type 1 and 2, then press the exponent
button, and so on. Using the command line is like that but one level higher ---
it controls all the files and applications.

Here's an example of one way being able to talk directly helps.
Terminal commands have something called *standard input* and *standard output*.
So, programs can read in text from a stream (or file, etc.),
and they will print the output to terminal by default.
Meaning you can compose the programs together with
[pipes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pipeline_%28Unix%29),
feeding the output of one program to the output of another.

For example, suppose you have a program `foo` that downloads the list
of participants on a contest sorted by score.
I want to find all the participants with surname Chen,
sort them alphabetically, and then put the result on my clipboard.
Roughly, this is `foo | grep Chen | sort | xsel --clipboard`.

Of course, without a terminal you *could* also run a graphical program,
open Google sheets, copy the results in, use the filter menu,
then sort it, and finally Ctrl-C the result. But why be so roundabout?
You know what you want, just type it directly.

The fact that all terminal programs read and write
in a uniform way is exactly what makes this possible.
Programmers like this simplicity and elegance.
They like it so much that software made for sophisticated users
often doesn't bother to provide a graphical interface.
This is the same reason why command line flags or text-based
configuration files tend to be text-based on Linux:
this means they options be manipulated in any editor,
[transferred from one computer to another via Git](https://github.com/vEnhance/dotfiles),
and so on.

Also Fish autocomplete is life-changing 🐟 ❤️  🔥
(zsh is good too I hear.)

### {{ faq("U-6", "Why Vim?") }}

To be written.
