title: Rec letters
header: Letters of recommendation
menu-position: 105
description: If you want to ask me for a recommendation letter
indent: 1

---

Sometimes high school students ask me for reference letters.
(Some of them even got in!)
So here are some details.

## {{ hl("programs", "Programs I can write for") }}

I write letters most commonly for
[RSI](https://www.cee.org/research-science-institute)
and typical undergraduate colleges (MIT and Common App).
I've also written letters for summer math camps
such as Canada/USA MathCamp, PROMYS/ROSS, etc.

## {{ hl("ask", "Whether to ask") }}

You should only ask for a letter from me if I know you somewhat well.[^obvious]

[^obvious]: This may sound obvious,
	but somehow I still get requests from total strangers.

Letters from me will necessarily be a bit unusual,
so you should think about whether I'm the right person to do this.
I am not formally a teacher or professor,
which may confuse any clueless admissions officers[^fancy].
Also, if I only worked with you at
[MOP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematical_Olympiad_Program)
or [OTIS](otis.html), I may not have spent enough time
with you in-person to "paint a picture"
compared to a teacher at your school, so to speak.

[^fancy]: Although I am gradually picking up increasingly fancy titles.

Usually people will ask me for letters if they want to add
some context about their math contest experiences
that's more than just score,
or to have me advocate for their mathematical ability.
Anyway, I will assume you have thought this through.

Since I'm a nice person,
I promise to not intentionally write you a negative letter.
If I feel I cannot write you a letter with nonnegative value,
I will decline your request instead.[^support]

[^support]: This is because I believe a good mentor should be
	unconditionally supportive, much like a parent,
	and that it's not my place to judge students.

## {{ hl("instructions", "Instructions") }}

If you do ask a letter for me, I need the following information.

1. Ask at least a month in advance.
2. Please remind me which years I worked with you (in OTIS/MOP/SPARC/etc.).
	I have been doing this for so long that the years are all mixed
	up in my head, so I'd like to double-check!
3. Provide any recent math olympiad results,
	like USAMO / TSTST / TST / IMO.
	(I may not use them, but I want to have them if I need them).
4. Is there anything in particular I should discuss?
	In particular, how math-focused do you want me to be?
5. Please **send me any application essays or completed forms**
	you are willing to share (drafts of essays are okay).
	This way, I can tailor my letter to complement
	what you've already written.
6. State explicitly when the deadline is.
7. Please specify what "type" of letter I am writing, if applicable.
	For example, colleges commonly distinguish between, say
	"required" letters from a math teacher, or optional "supplements"
	(see e.g. [MIT][mitsupp], second-to-last paragraph).
	It is useful for me to know whether I am the main voice or if
	I am expecting to add on to what other (usually more traditional)
	teachers have to say.

[mitsupp]: https://mitadmissions.org/apply/firstyear/letters-of-recommendation/

Usually, I will always submit letters
at least a week in advance if you asked ahead of time.
So if it's less than a week until the deadline and the letter I promised
hasn't been submitted yet, then please double-check on it.
