title: Mentors
header: Competition mentors
menu-position: 71
description: Listing of other people who take students
indent: 1

---

This page contains a list of referrals for math competition training at various levels.
They are divided into two categories:

* Small programs offering either 1:1 instruction or small group lessons; and
* Individuals offering 1:1 instruction.

The lists below are in alphabetical order.

# Programs

## Athemath

* Primary contact: [Ali Cy](https://www.egmo.org/people/person1751/);
  ($\text{president}\texttt{@}\text{athemath}{.}\text{org}$)
* Website: [athemath.org](https://athemath.org);
* 1:5 instruction for **nonbinary and female students only**.
* Athemath provides a hybrid math program which includes small group
  math lessons for students, along with fun community-building events like games and movies.
  All teachers are female/nonbinary and MOPpers/MPfG winners.
  We are a nonprofit and our program costs only $90 for 3 months.

## MAST

* Primary contact: Dennis Chen ($\text{proofprogram}\texttt{@}\text{gmail}{.}\text{com}$)
* Website: [mast.geometryexplorer.xyz](https://mast.geometryexplorer.xyz/)
* Scheduled group classes twice a month during the school year,
  with breaks for major USA contests (AMCs, AIME, and USAMO).
* MAST is an AIME training program intended for students who can comfortably qualify for the AIME.
  The goal is to provide motivated students the resources to seriously attempt
  qualification for the national olympiad, as well as providing a social sphere
  for people to get to know each other.
  It's a self study program somewhat similar to OTIS, in that
  (a) we have more materials than we could feasibly hold lectures for and
  (b) people are expected to peruse it at their own discretion.
  Information about staff can be found on [the website](https://mast.geometryexplorer.xyz/staff/).

## Xinke's Math Academy

* Primary contact: [Xinke Guo-Xue](https://artofproblemsolving.com/community/user/40902)
  ($\text{xinkeguoxue}\texttt{@}\text{gmail}{.}\text{com}$)
* Website: [xinkesmathacademy.com](https://xinkesmathacademy.com/)
* Open to both 1:1 instruction and small group lessons.
* Xinke Guo-Xue runs small group lessons for interested students
  preparing for Mathcounts, AMC, and AIME.
  He also gives private lessons to new students on a case by case basis
  for short periods of time.
  He has a bachelors in math from MIT, and is passionate about math education.

# Individuals

## Alex Villaro Krüger

* Contact: $\text{alex}@\text{drechslerspil}{.}\text{dk}$
* 1:1 instruction
* I'm interested in tutoring one on one with students who are interested in
  olympiads and in exploring problems over a longer time (for instance problems
  leading to existing theory). I study mathematics in Moscow, but I am from
  Denmark where I have taken initiative to Nordic participation in
  [RMM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Romanian_Master_of_Mathematics_and_Sciences),
  among other things. However, I do not have personal experience in US specific
  olympiads such as AIME.

## Reed LaFleche

* Contact: $\text{rslafleche}@\text{gmail}{.}\text{com}$
* 1:1 instruction
* My name is Reed LaFleche. I began my career in contest math taking the AMC my
  junior year of high school (2010), qualified for the USAMO 2010 and 2011, and
  attended MOP 2010. I graduated MIT with a degree in math in 2015 and have
  since worked in engineering while continuing to learn math on my own time.
