title: MOP
header: MOPper World 2.0
menu-position: 40
description: Popular math olympiad training materials written by Evan Chen.

---



This section of the website is dedicated to public-facing
material from various years of MOP.
It's similar in spirit to the [MOPper world](http://moppers.kaseorg.com/)
that ran between 1997 and 2004.

## About MOP

MOP is a three-week camp which in modern times is held in Carnegie Mellon
University at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(For 2020 and 2021, the camp was run on Discord.)
Prior to 2015, the camp was held at University of Nebraska-Lincoln.
See [FAQ CR-7](https://web.evanchen.cc/faq-rules.html#CR-7)
for invitation rules.

At the time of writing, the camp is headed by **Po-Shen Loh (director)**
and **Evan Chen (assistant academic director)**.
There is no academic director or assistant director,
because our naming makes lots of sense.
In addition to instructors,
there is also a team of "teaching assistants"
(although we typically just call them "graders")
which help with logisitcal work and do the arduous task of marking all the exams.

This page is dedicated to archival of various MOP-related material.
Use the navigation bar on the right to find things.
[Razvan Gelca also has some pictures](https://www.math.ttu.edu/~rgelca/photos.html).

## ELMO

The *ELMO* is a competition which is organized by
the returning MOPpers, as a test for the newcomers.
The competition features full-fledged "teams" led by team leaders
and a full coordination process.
All problems are crafted by past MOP students,
some of which are published in the
[ELMO shortlist](https://web.evanchen.cc/elmo/problems.html)
even if not selected for the exam.

To see past ELMO problems, check the [ELMO page](elmo/).

## Mock IMO

The *Mock IMO* is run by the staff using past Shortlist problems;
it also features a mock coordination where the six members of the IMO
team have their papers exhibited in a coordination sense,
with members of USA delegation serving as defenders
and "grading" staff members serving as the prosecutors.
(See [FAQ CR-10](https://web.evanchen.cc/faq-rules.html#CR-10)
for coordination details.)

<!-- TODO link -->

## MOP Homework

<!-- TODO link -->

## Puzzle hunt

To be written. This page isn't a puzzle.

## Quotes

<!-- TODO link -->

## Singing troupe

The **MOP Singing Troupe** is a tradition dating back to around 2010,
started by Evan o'Dorney.
It consists of people (trying to) sing.
At each talent show, it is tradition for the singing troupe
to be the opening and closing act.

## The letter S

For many years, the official name for MOP was "MOSP",
but the letter S was almost universally ignored by staff and students,
and the deletion of the letter S became an ongoing gag.
The S was finally officially excised starting in MOP 2017.

<!-- TODO write -->

## T-shirts

Traditionally, MOP T-shirts are printed in black/white on grey.
This page contains art assets that were used on T-shirts in various years.

Here are images for T-shirts in recent years.
(Click an image to see a full-resolution version).

{{ tshirt(2016) }}
{{ tshirt(2017) }}
{{ tshirt(2018) }}
{{ tshirt(2019) }}
{{ tshirt(2020) }}
{{ tshirt(2021) }}

<style type="text/css">
a.tshirt-link img.tshirt {
	width: 150px;
	border: 2px grey solid;
	border-radius: 5px;
	margin: 7px 7px;
}
img.tshirt:hover {
	box-shadow: 0px 0px 35px #dddd33;
}
</style>
