title: Napkin
header: The Napkin Project
---

## Project Status
The project is currently *nowhere* near done; however, since I have no intention
of publishing these notes in any binding way,
<span style="color:red;">*I am happy to send preview copies of the current draft
upon an email request.*</span> (Requests may take a few days to process.)

## Description
The Napkin project is a personal exposition project of mine
aimed at making higher math accessible to high school students.
The philosophy is stated in the preamble:

> I'll be eating a quick lunch with some friends of mine who are still in high school.
> They'll ask me what I've been up to the last few weeks, and I'll tell them that I've been learning category theory.
> They'll ask me what category theory is about.
> I tell them it's about abstracting things by looking at just the structure-preserving morphisms between them, rather than the objects themselves.
> I'll try to give them the standard example Gp, but then I'll realize that they don't know what a homomorphism is.
> So then I'll start trying to explain what a homomorphism is, but then I'll remember that they haven't learned what a group is.
> So then I'll start trying to explain what a group is, but by the time I finish writing the group axioms on my napkin, they've already forgotten why I was talking about groups in the first place.
> And then it's 1PM, people need to go places, and I can't help but think:
>
> *<span style="color:red;">Man, if I had forty hours instead of forty minutes, I bet I could actually have explained this all.</span>*
>
> This book is my attempt at those forty hours.

This project has evolved to more than just forty hours.
Each chapter takes about 10-15 hours to produce, so there are some limits
to how much bigger this can grow, but I really look forward to the finished product.

## A Few Sample Chapters
Here are a few excerpts from the November 26 draft
(the chapter numbers have changed since then).
They may contain typos and mistakes, and could change dramatically in later editions.
For preview copies of the entire draft, email me at the address above.

+ [Chapter on holomorphic functions](papers/napkin-sample-holomorphic.pdf),
+ [Chapter on the Frobenius endomorphism](papers/napkin-sample-frob.pdf),
+ [Chapter on forcing](papers/napkin-sample-force.pdf).

## Current Table of Contents.
Last updated November 2015.
Note that about 10 of the chapters are still too be written.

#### I. Basic Algebra and Topology
+ Chapter 1. What is a Group? 
+ Chapter 2. What is a Space? 
+ Chapter 3. Homomorphisms and Quotient Groups 
+ Chapter 4. Topological Notions 
+ Chapter 5. Compactness 
#### II. Linear Algebra and Multivariable Calculus 
+ Chapter 6. What is a Vector Space? 
+ Chapter 7. Trace and Determinant 
+ Chapter 8. Spectral Theory 
+ Chapter 9. Inner Product Spaces 
#### III. Groups, Rings, and More 
+ Chapter 10. Group Actions Overkill AIME Problems 
+ Chapter 11. Find All Groups 
+ Chapter 12. Rings and Ideals 
+ Chapter 13. The PID Structure Theorem 
#### IV. Complex Analysis 
+ Chapter 14. Holomorphic Functions 
+ Chapter 15. Meromorphic Functions 
+ Chapter 16. Holomorphic Square Roots and Logarithms 
#### V. Quantum Algorithms
+ Chapter 17. Quantum states and measurements
+ Chapter 18. Quantum circuits
+ Chapter 19. Shor's algorithm
#### VI. Algebraic Topology I: Homotopy 
+ Chapter 20. Some Topological Constructions 
+ Chapter 21. Fundamental Groups 
+ Chapter 22. Covering Projections 
#### VII. Category Theory 
+ Chapter 23. Objects and Morphisms 
+ Chapter 24. Functors and Natural Transformations 
+ Chapter 25. Abelian Categories 
#### VIII. Differential Geometry
+ Chapter 26. Multivariable Calculus Done Correctly 
+ Chapter 27. Differential Forms 
+ Chapter 28. Integrating Differential Forms 
+ Chapter 29. A Bit of Manifolds
#### IX. Algebraic Topology II: Homology 
+ Chapter 30. Singular Homology 
+ Chapter 31. The Long Exact Sequence 
+ Chapter 32. More on Computing Homology Groups 
+ Chapter 33. Bonus: Cellular Homology
+ Chapter 34. Singular Cohomology
+ Chapter 35. Applications of Cohomology
#### X. Algebraic NT I: Rings of Integers 
+ Chapter 36. Algebraic Integers 
+ Chapter 37. Unique Factorization (Finally!) 
+ Chapter 38. Minkowski Bound and Class Groups 
+ Chapter 39. More Properties of the Discriminant 
+ Chapter 40. Bonus: Let's Solve Pell's Equation! 
#### XI. Algebraic NT II: Galois and Ramification Theory 
+ Chapter 41. Things Galois 
+ Chapter 42. Finite Fields 
+ Chapter 43. Ramification Theory 
+ Chapter 44. The Frobenius Endomorphism 
#### XII. Representation Theory
+ Chapter 45. Representations of Algebras
+ Chapter 46. Semisimple Algebras
+ Chapter 47. Characters
+ Chapter 48. Some Applications
#### XIII. Algebraic Geometry I: Varieties 
+ Chapter 49. Affine Varieties 
+ Chapter 50. Affine Varieties as Ringed Spaces
+ Chapter 51. Projective Varieties 
+ Chapter 52. Bonus: Bezout's Theorem
+ Chapter 53. Quasi-Projective Varieties
#### XIV. Algebraic Geometry II: Schemes 
+ Chapter 54. Sheaves and Ringed Spaces
+ Chapter 55. Schemes
+ Chapter 56. More on Sheaves
+ Chapter 57. Divisors and Line Bundles
+ Chapter 60. Shor's Algorithm
#### XV. Set Theory I: ZFC, Ordinals, and Cardinals 
+ Chapter 58. Bonus: Zorn's Lemma and Cauchy's Functional Equation
+ Chapter 59. Zermelo-Frankel with Choice 
+ Chapter 60. Ordinals 
+ Chapter 61. Cardinals 
#### XVI. Set Theory II: Model Theory and Forcing 
+ Chapter 62. Inner Model Theory 
+ Chapter 63. Forcing 
+ Chapter 64. Breaking the Continuum Hypothesis 
