title: Tutoring (OTIS)
header: Olympiad Training for Individual Students (OTIS)
menu-position: 12
indent: 1

---

Since 2015, I have run a small,
informal tutoring program during the school year
for students aiming to do well on the USA(J)MO,
now informally called *OTIS*.
This page has details for interested students.
[See here for some thoughts on tutoring philosophy.][tutor]

### Synopsis
OTIS is centered around two-week topic units
which I pick for each student based on their background.
Each unit comes with a homework set of 5-8 olympiad problems.
Students are expected to keep in regular contact with me
about these homework problems.
Additionally practice exams are assigned each month.

Typically, I meet with students over Google Hangouts
either every week or every two weeks, for 60-90 minutes.
I use LaTeX-Beamer as a blackboard and so full transcripts are posted
immediately after each session.

### Prerequisites
You should be comfortable reading and writing proofs,
and able to confidently qualify for national olympiad.
(e.g. scoring 10+ on AIME).

There is also a summer homework packet that accepted students
will be required to work on,
which includes reading from [my textbook EGMO][geombook].

English-speaking students from countries other than USA are welcome too;
though we will have to work out details for time zones in advance.

### Rate
$80(H+5)$ USD per semester,
where $H$ is number of hours.
(In reality per-hour rates [don't make much sense][tutor],
but I want to keep things simple here.)

### How to join
If you are interested in joining OTIS,
please email me the following information:

* Your name, grade, and school
* Any relevant contest scores and history
* If you have taken USA(J)MO or TSTST before, indicate which problems you solved.
* Subject preferences, like "strong geo, weak at algebra"
* Goals for the year, like "make MOP".
  (This can be rough, just a guideline for me.)
* Preference for meeting every week or every two weeks.

Note that each year I get many more students than I have space for,
so unfortunately I am not able to accommodate all requests.
I do selection for students for Fall $N$ / Spring $N+1$
starting early May of year $N$, shortly after the grading of that year's USAMO.

### History
I started tutoring in 2015 when a group of parents
from Phillips Andover emailed me in April 2015,
asking if I'd be interested in coaching a group of five of their students.
At the time I called it Andover Olympiad Training.
Since then more and more requests have come to me.

I think the norm is to brag about my students now, so
here are some of my students who have done exceptionally well.
(Of course many of these students were already strong
even before they joined my program!)

* **Zack Chroman**: MOP 2016, TST group 2017,
  [RMM 2017 (silver)](http://rmms.lbi.ro/rmm2017/index.php?id=results_math)
* **Michael Ren**: TST group 2017,
  [RMM 2017 (HM)](http://rmms.lbi.ro/rmm2017/index.php?id=results_math)
* **Annie Siye Zhu**: MOP 2016, TST group 2017,
  [EGMO 2017 team](https://www.egmo.org/registration/2017/person212)

[tutor]: https://usamo.wordpress.com/2016/02/07/stop-paying-me-per-hour/
[geombook]: geombook.html
