- Franklyn Wang: "Evan has contributed to a decrease in Resnik's reputation."<br>
  Brandon Wang: "Evan is not solely responsible, right?
  Others are also responsible."<br>
  Franklyn Wang: "Yeah, like Resnik."
- Luke Robitaille: "I did not make ARML tiebreakers
  as a 12-year-old this year."
- Staff: "Let O be a point inside cyclic quadrilateral ABCD.
  Diagonals AC and BD intersect at P.
  Let X be the isogonal conjugate of B with respect to ODP.
  Show that one of the two points X and B lies on BX."
- Also staff: "Alice says, 'you are a doofus'.
  Bob says, 'no you'. Compute the total number of words exchanged."
- Milan Haiman: "This is a 2-page solution right?"<br>
  Po-Shen Loh: "No, it's 15."
- Sign on the way to breakfast: "Statue removed for restoration."<br>
  Espen Slettnes: "What statue? I don't see it."
- Andrew Lin: "There's nothing wrong with light mode."
- Luke Robitaille: "Some people should sing louder.
  This is Singing Troupe, not Singing Luke."
- Found on a fortune cookie:
  "Hard work pays off in the future. Laziness pays off now."
- Kevin Wu: "Their corn tastes more like their garlic bread
  than their garlic bread does."
- Franklyn Wang: "As Winston Churchill said during World War Two,
  'If you’re going through hell, keep going.'
  That’s what you do for this problem."
- Evan Chen, while teaching class:
  "I can't wait for class to end."
- Rachel Zhang: "Evan's like, tiny, right?"
- Henry Jiang: "I lose everything. One time I lost something,
  and then someone picked it up, and then he lost it, so I found it again."
- Jeff Lin: "Teaching your four-year-old to drink is
  like teaching your eight grader bary."
- Po-Shen Loh: "And I think this is a lesson we can all learn from,
  especially for the IMO team:
  when you do something, do it with full commitment."<br>
  Luke Robitaille: "So basically, you're saying that a
  full commitment is what you're thinking of?"
- Franklyn Wang: "Do piranha plants exist?
  Or are they just a Mario thing?"
- Holden Mui: "How’s the corn?"<br>
  Po-Shen Loh: "It’s very dehydrated.
  It’s like they forgot to add water."
  Sophie Liu: "I described it as pieces of matter
  that just so happen to be yellow."
- Derek Liu: "If four of you took 7 days to solve ELMO 6,
  by pigeonhole one of you took only one day to solve it."
- Cordelia Hu: "Any solution is a one-liner
  if the line is sufficiently long."<br>
  Evan Chen: "Aren't lines supposed to be infinite in length or something?"
- "One day [Resnik] had corn, then the next day they had corn
  with green beans, and you could clearly tell it was yesterday's corn.
  Then the next day they had fried rice with corn and green beans."
- Feodor Yevtushenko: "This rice tastes like rice except
  one in every like 20 grains is uncooked."<br>
  (Derek Liu: "Did you mean one in every 20 grains is cooked?")
- Many people: "Mr. Turtle, Mr. Turtle, come out of your shell @Holden"
- Brandon Wang: "A bunch of geo people are good at bashing;
  then they are the committee and write problems that can’t be bashed;
  then the students can’t bash; and the circle continues."
- Henry Jiang: "If you play a wrong note really loudly,
  that's just called jazz."
- Jeff Chen: "It's not wrong, it's just misguided."
- Jeff Chen: "Walking is nontrivially hard.
  It's $O(n)$ effort, whereas sitting here is $O(1)$ effort"
- Jeff Chen: "I’m too high; I’m going to go run around."
- Victoria Hu: "Oh yeah didn't u donate Raina to me at the airport?"
- Debbie Lee: "I don't think Jane Street would appreciate
  all their thousands of dollars going to fruit snacks."
- Derek Liu: "Dude, I haven't made a single haiku in all of MOP.
  What the heck."
