- "Is pho Chen Lo the usimo coach"
- Alex: "Geo is just 3-variable inequalities but easier."
- Ali: "Algebra mains are better than geo mains by the AM-GM inequality."
- Arnav: "The first person who came was unauthorized to turn the lights on"
- Benny: "I used degree 0 moving points."
- Brian: "Why do I feel like I'm in 6-dimensional hyperbolic geometry at this airport?"
- Brian: "I moderately want to be featured on quote log."
- Calvin: "Guess who swept TSTST Day 1 in like an hour! Exactly! bluelinfish!"<br>
  Andrew: "Wrong, it took me one and a half hours."
- Channing: "What's wrong with hanging pieces in bullet?
  Makes it easier to decide which piece to premove."
- Daniel: "This problem is like... you know the meme where you lock the door with a cheeto?"
- Daniel: "If you take the Fourier transform of the handwriting..."
- Ekam: "Not just a food delivery service but a justice delivery service."
- Evan (before coordination)
  "I look forward to meeting you on the other side of the table in glorious combat
  (and hope that we can still be friends afterwards, because I will be strict)."
- Evan (before coordination): "I'm about to make some children really sad".
- Feodor: "Can I get a Benson burner in my room?"
- Hannah: "Advantage of freehand is that you can always make something true"
- Ian: "They shouldn't be called MOP students. They should be called fossils."
- John: "Can you explain that to me at a lower level?""
- John: "So the idea is to change the word 'smallest' to 'largest' and change the words 'try to prove' to 'claim.'"
- John: "That's outrageous."
- Karn, to ELMO coordinator: "I understand that Yoll's solution to ELMO2 is difficult to read.
  I'll give you a cleaned up version."<br>
  Yoll, to Karn: "I have no idea what I did on that problem."<br>
  Karn, to coordinator, one minute later: "I agree with your score."
- Kevin: "I'm sad I can only bench 85."<br>
  Aryan: "Well it's like induction. You need a base case somewhere."
- Krittika: "Cracked vs cooked side by side comparison right here."<br>
  Ekam: "That just means we're both eggs."
- Lanie: "I only chase death, not angles."
- Lanie: "Why does this deck have four jokers?"<br>
  Andrew: "Well, that's Cathy."
- Lingfei: "Everything is edible at least once."
- Laura: "I see the vision"<br>
  Rachel: "You see so many visions. Maybe you should get your eyes checked."
- Raymond: "The circumcenter of the nearest three Taco Bells lies on IMSA campus."
- Royce: "Are you two in line?"<br>
  Razzi: "Any two people form a line."
- Selena: "Why are you showering? There are no more tests."
- Shihan: "Integration is sigma."<br>
  Catherine: "Erm, actually, its ∫."
- Tristan: "It's the same thing as when you learn about complex numbers in 5th grade."
- Vincent: "Will the field trip groups be abelian?"<br>
  Evan: "Yes, they have at most five people. Also, you're commuting."
- Wendy: "新加坡每个人都是平行四边形"
- Wendy: "I wanna be a parallelepiped when I grow up"
- Wendy: "If you're poor and you're hot, you're doing something wrong."
- Wendy: "I've been exposed by my closest friend"<br>
  Krittika: "Awwww I'm your closest friend?"<br>
  Wendy: "I mean yea you're probably the one who's closest to me in terms of physical proximity right now."<br>
  Krittika: "Wait that sounds kinda sus."<br>
  Wendy: "It's only sus if you make it sus."
