title: School FAQ's
header: School FAQ's
description: Some FAQ's about math contests and my personal life.

---

[Return to FAQ Index.](faqs.html)

These are FAQ's about high school and college.

### S-1. Why did you transfer from Harvard to MIT?
Short answer: mostly social reasons.
Long answer: [See here](https://usamo.wordpress.com/2015/06/28/transferring/).

### S-2. I'm interested in learning some higher math. Where can I start?
If you like my writing and are comfortable with proofs,
try my [Napkin](napkin.html).
It was basically written to answer this question.
Other possible references are mentioned in [Recommendations](recommend.html).

See also S-6 below.

### S-3. How do you live-TeX your notes so quickly?
The main contributing factors are:

+ My typing speed is quite high, at around 650 characters per minute.
+ My editor is Vim (on Arch Linux), which is one of the fastest editors.
+ I use [LaTeX-Suite](https://vim-latex.sourceforge.net/) for Vim.
+ Several additional custom keyboard shortcuts specifically for TeX,
  see the vim folder in [my dotfiles](https://github.com/vEnhance/dotfiles).
+ I have conceal enabled, so I can read my source code more easily.
+ I run [latexmk -pvc](https://www.phys.psu.edu/~collins/software/latexmk-jcc/) in the background, so the PDF also compiles in realtime.

I have been using Vim and LaTeX since I was a teenager,
so I am quite proficient with both.

[Link to corresponding dotfiles](https://github.com/vEnhance/dotfiles).

### S-4. How did you take undergraduate / graduate math classes in high school?

Context: in high school I five classes from
UC Berkeley and San Jose State total; you can see [the notes I took][notes].

The main limiting factor is getting your high school to let you run off.
Every college professor I've met is more than happy to help out a
high school student who is interested in learning more math.
(This may be untrue at certain top schools just because those professors
get more audit requests than they can actually accommodate.)
It's the [high school bureaucrats that put their foot down][blank].

Talk with your high school administration and see if you can strike a deal.
If one person says no, talk to someone else.
You have to be aggressive with these things to make progress,
because otherwise the administration has no real incentive to help you.

### S-5. What are your thoughts on high school math research?

I'm pretty cynical of it.
The (buzz)word "research" itself is a red flag for me:
it sounds like the kind of thing
people want to say they've done, rather than want to do.

Usually, if a high school student is interested in higher math,
I recommend that they spend their time *learning new subjects*,
rather than working on the kind of artificial "problems" that
high school research is often concerned with.

Some excerpts from [Euler Circle][euler] which I agree with:

> You may be familiar with high-school "research" in biology,
> where a high-school student works in a lab over a summer,
> mostly doing menial tasks like cleaning test tubes,
> and is rewarded with a paper to publish or to present in
> science fair competitions. . . .
> There is no mathematical equivalent of cleaning test tubes.
>
> **You simply cannot expect to work for a few months over the summer
> and have something to show for it.** An exceptional high-school student
> should expect to spend around 1000 hours over the course of two years
> on research in order to have a reasonable (but far from certain)
> chance of producing a publishable paper.

That being said, if you still want to work on research projects,
consider programs like [PRIMES](https://math.mit.edu/research/highschool/primes/index.php),
or finding a professor near you.

### S-6. I want to take some advanced math classes from nearby college, which ones do you recommend?

Short answer:

* Learn abstract algebra or real/complex analysis; and
* Avoid linear algebra or multivariable calculus.

Long answer: I am assuming you are interested in learning
a lot of math eventually (rather than, say,
learning math for the sake of physics / engineering / etc.,
which is fine, but then this advice is not for you).
In that case, I think both linear algebra (as it is usually taught)
and multivariable calculus are significantly overrated
for people who (a) know how proofs work, and (b) want to pursue higher math.

Linear algebra is useful, but when taught as a standalone class, you will
mostly be doing manipulations with matrices. It's not a bad thing but I think
it's not something that needs to take one whole semester if you're going to
eventually redo the whole thing abstractly with $k$-modules anyways. I would
rather spend the semester learning abstract algebra as a whole (which includes
the abstract treatment of vector spaces), which is the language required to do
anything algebraic. Many higher level courses are going to assume you know what
a domain is, an ideal is, etc. and you would like to learn this as soon as
possible.

Multivariable calculus and ordinary/partial differential equations is a bit of
a dead end, in my opinion, unless you are interested in these sort of topics
for their own sake (in which case you should just learn them, not let random
strangers on the Internet tell you what to do). Real and complex analysis,
together with enough point-set/metric topology to go with them, are more
valuable as core material: many higher level courses are going to assume you
know what a compact set is, a real manifold is, etc. and you would like to
learn this as soon as possible.

I think the reason that linalg/multivar are so popular is that you don't need
to understand proofs to take these classes, so they appeal to a broad audience.
But if you do understand how to read and write proofs, you are quite lucky, and
you have some better options available to you for where to explore next.

### S-7. How do I get in to MIT?

You are asking the wrong person; I am not an admissions officer.
Instead, you should read [mitadmissions.org](https://mitadmissions.org).
For example the post
[Applying Sideways](https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entry/applying_sideways/)
will literally tell you the answer to this question,
even though it's not the answer you want to hear.

I have nothing to add to this. Really.

People always want to believe there is some mythical criteria
or hidden goal in the admissions process,
a closely guarded secret held from the general public,
and hence the best route is to find out this insider information.
No, seriously, just listen to the people who do admissions for a living.
MIT is not the Illuminati, even if it a substring.

[notes]: coursework.html
[euler]: https://eulercircle.com/research/thoughts-on-research/
[tuition]: https://web.mit.edu/facts/tuition.html
[blank]: https://usamo.wordpress.com/2016/05/27/fill-in-the-blank/comment-page-1/#comment-1694
